Hey, Freddy from Max Track and Axis UK
here. Um, just going to have a quick
look through the Surge Foil from Axis.
Um, I've done a few bits and bobs with
Adrian and Sheny and a couple of shops
in the UK, but there's nothing quite
like putting your own thoughts down on
video and maybe stretching to it a
little bit more than I have done on
those videos. Um, the Surge is a new
performance surf foil from Axis. We've
had it since the tail end of 2025, I
think. Now, uh, we're still struggling
with stock. It's been quite a nice
seller for us, which is obviously good,
but it means that I haven't used too
many of them. Um, namely the the bigger
sizes essentially, the 1010 and the 950.
We haven't managed to keep in stock yet,
so I haven't had a go on those. Um,
who's it for? What is it? It's a surf
foil, but don't let that put you off.
The way I've been trying to reframe my
brain or or explain to people is
90% of what we're doing here in the UK,
this foil is perfect for uh and that's
why we were banging on about wanting to
get hold of it for a long, long time.
The first time I jumped on this in
America, I came off the water, I ran
straight up to Adrian to give him back
his safoil and I said, "Stop building
everything else you're building and just
send me those." This is all we need for
our UK conditions. Um, the bulk of folk
in the UK and let's say Northern Europe
as well, we're wing foiling. We're
playing around on beach brakes. We're
parking up riding in front of our car
coming back to our car. We're not doing
massive sends. It's getting there a
little bit with the power winging, but
realistically, we are riding beach
brakes. We might be smashing around our
local lakes and reservoirs, doing some
few jumps and bits and bobs and doing
some nice turns and drives and tacks,
but that's what we're doing and that's
where the surge comes into its own. Um,
so if you're on the Axis system and you
may be on something like the Spitfires
or the RV2s or you're on the BSC's and
the HPS and you're looking potentially
at what's next, this is this is number
one. um it ticks too many boxes not to
be useful.
We're on to this like third evolution of
surf foils and that's not just Axis
wide. That's that's
every brand under the sun essentially.
They the designers all seem to be
getting to grips with combining a lot of
elements that we've had quite a few
different foils for and been able to put
them in to one. So the surge turns
better than we've had before. And I
appreciate me saying this can come
across very disingenuous, but again,
it's the designer's fault, not mine. It
turns better, it glides better, it pumps
better, and it's got a bigger range of
conditions that it can ride in. It lifts
earlier than foils have them at this
size, especially, and yet it's still got
the high end that we would want from
something like a surfo. So, difficult to
hear, but unfortunately, it's correct.
And as much as Adrian doesn't like me
saying it, it is killing a couple of the
foils for me in my own um use area. The
Spitfire and the RV2 are the main ones
now. And I feel like although they're
still in the range, it is slimming down
a touch. So now the Axis range revolves
mainly around Surge, Fireball, Pump and
Glide, and what am I forgetting?
Christ, that's not good, is it? Tempo.
There you go. So, the new tempos, um,
we've not done much of those in the UK
here, and I and I knew we wouldn't
because we don't do what the tempo
really is designed for. There's not a
level at which that foil is is useful
yet. That's not to say we won't get
there, but that's where this one comes
into its own because it ticks more boxes
for us.
Um, the first thing you'll notice then,
jumping on Surge, and by all means, if
you need to demo anything, please give
us a shout or any of the local retailers
because they are all geared up now. The
Surge is the best turning axis foil that
we've ever had. What we've had in the
past, the Spitfire, the RTV V2 and
things, they're really good at yoring.
They turn quite loosely on the Y axis,
which is great. It's fine, and you can y
it and lean, but you don't get the nice
smooth roll that we want from the likes
of a surfboard, for instance. And that's
where the surge comes in. So, that is
the the first thing you'll notice. And
it's a nice progressive roll as well.
Uh, I've ridden a few foils in the past
from different brands. Um, there was
quite a looseness in the roll and they
were great and it was definitely a
certain feeling that you you'd get used
to. But this is not that. A lot more
progressive. So those it felt like they
would roll and you'd have to catch it
before it went too far. These they will
progressively go as far as you want it
to go and depending on how much effort
you put into it, it will do what you
want it to do. So the roll is a really
big one for us. Uh, pumpability is
probably numero two. Um, I've never been
able to link waves. I know this is all
going to come down to personal um not
preferences, but my findings
essentially, but I'm a pretty poor prone
foiler and pumping has never been
something I've been able to master at
all. Uh, especially on smaller foils.
The surge has allowed me to link waves
quite comfortably, a lot more
confidently than I have done previously.
Um, so the pump on the Surge is far
easier. And what's really nice is you
don't have to go up to the bigger sizes
to get the benefit of that. All of them
pump really well, obviously for their
size, but that 890 that I've spent most
of my time on, I can pump that well two
or three two or three waves quite
comfortably until I run out of steam. um
you then get quite a bit of drive and I
use the word drive mainly in this in the
pump and what I mean by that is it feels
like you don't just pump to stay high on
the mast you get forward momentum when
you when you pump forwards and that's
something that's come from the evolution
of the likes of the downwind higher
aspect foils so we never got it out of
any of the foils until downwind racing
became more of a thing. And as much as I
might not be part of that world, I'm
aware and I think a lot of us were aware
when we start looking at what the guys
were doing during the big Hawaiian races
and Australian races, they weren't
trying to ride the wave they were on
because they're in a race. They're
trying to get A to B as quickly as it
possibly can. So, they were going from
the wave they were on to the wave in
front. And when they were on the wave in
front, they were trying to get to the
wave in front of that. And what it got
the brands all doing or designers all
doing was trying to make something that
would accelerate forward. So you got a
huge amount of drive in the fireball for
instance to get onto the wave in front
of you. What they've now managed to do,
what Adrian's managed to do is put the
that essence into a surf foil. So it's
still not the quickest foil in the world
and it will stay in the pocket. It's not
like it's going to accelerate too much
forwards. Should you want to pump off
the back and go left or go right or go
left or go back or forwards, it feels
like you can really choose where this
foil goes because you're confident in
the pumping and it drives forwards a lot
a lot quicker. So, it takes less effort
to get to where you want to go. There's
also still a really nice amount of glide
and I think that's getting really
important for the powering element that
we're looking at nowadays. So,
[clears throat and cough]
previously the likes of the Spitfire,
for instance, to get the turning that we
got out of the Spitfire, which was a
great foil for its time, it meant you
lacked a little bit of glide because the
aspect ratios were a little lower. Um,
and I know it's not just down to that,
but that's what my brain says. Um, so
you you struggled with the glide and you
struggled with with the time that you
had before you needed to figure out what
was going on. I you needed to get onto
another wave. The Surge has a lot more
glide there. Nine and a half aspect
ratio. So, it sits sort of it's sort of
in between the Spitfire and the RV2. RV2
has always been around 10 aspect ratio.
Spitfire is seven or eight depending on
which size you go for. Uh, and
relatively the surge is quite high in
comparison to some of its competitor
products um at 9 and a half, but it
doesn't slow you down in the turn and it
only helps you in the in the pumping and
the glide. So, big win there. I've only
really used the 890 and the 830. As
mentioned, the bigger sizes especially
haven't haven't managed to keep keep in
stock yet. Um, I'm 80 kilos on a good
day. I'm a little bit more, but I like
to say 80. Um, and I've been using the
890 for power winging and light wind
winging and the 830 for anything that's
a little bit more powered. I've also put
a 740 on demo simply because I've done
some toe foiling sessions where the 830
has just been a little bit too
overpowered.
That's where I like the idea of a 740.
So for me,
my winging wing, winging front wing is
going to be the 830. If I'm powered, if
I'm under power with a wing or if I'm in
some beefy conditions for anything, the
830 is going to be able to handle them a
little bit more. If I'm power winging
and trying to link bumps and which I'm
not that good at, so I need the the all
the help I can get. Generally, the 890
is a really nice little extra little bit
of glide between the two of them. It
does mean it can't handle quite the same
amount of speed, but I get the benefit
of being able to link waves. So, that is
those are my two go-tos, and I don't
think that's going to change anytime
soon. I then keep getting some really
good reviews on the 1010 and the 950
from the likes of the subfoilers. So,
anyone that's riding sort of shorter,
sharper bumps, um some of the guys in
Scotland for instance on the locks where
the fetch is not huge, um anything that
stands up a little bit more, the Surge
is really, really nice.
Uh when you look at the range, just to
give you a brief when might you not use
it, the Fireball is still much much
better at glide and all out glide and
speed. So, if you're smashing around
your local lake as fast as you possibly
can, the fireball is going to be the one
to go for. The Surge isn't the fastest
foil in the world. It doesn't need to
be. It doesn't want to be. Um, if that's
where you're going to be spending most
of your time, maybe the Fireball. And
likewise, if you're out in some open
water bumps and you're riding
weaker swell but or faster moving swell,
which is essentially or or tends to be a
lot shallower swell, you need something
that can keep up with the higher speeds
of those those waves. And that's where
the fireball comes in as well. So those
are the two sort of main staples um in
in the Axis range nowadays. And then I
pair it with
the latest range. Oh, where is it? Here.
Latest range of rear wings from Axis,
the surf skinny.
Relatively simple progression onwards
from what we've had already. And that's
what I really quite like looking at in
the Axis range. Obviously, we work with
Adrian not closely, but we get to see
what he's what he's thinking in his mind
and you see the progression forwards in
all of the ranges of the foils that
we've got and especially the rear wings
as well. So, the progressives have been
out for a long time now and we use those
for non everything depending on level
and and discipline.
And then we saw the skinnies sort of
come into their own as the downwinding
stuff again. So, as the fireballs came
out, we needed something that could keep
up on the rear with the front wing. So,
the front wings wanting to go flat out
all the time. The progressives are
generally a little bit slower because
they're a bit of a thicker cord and and
and the the thickness is a lot more
anyway. Um, so the skinnies come out
really really nice bits of kit. A lot
faster moving, but they don't turn quite
the same as the likes of the
progressives. So if you want all your
all out turning and surfing, the
progressives if you wanted your downwind
glide, your skinnies, and that left a
little bit of a hole in the middle where
the surf skinnies come in, and you can
see where they get their name from. Um,
if you're doing anything again
wavebased, the Surfkinny is a really
good contender. Well worth having a look
at. 280, 300, 320. I'd say that 280 is
going to pair really nicely with some
really big foils where you don't need
the stability out of the tail. The 300
is going to be your real sweet spot in
the middle, your Goldilock sort of rear
wing. And your 320 is going to be really
suitable for the likes of the smaller
foils when you're going flat out and you
needed a little bit of stability.
When you look at ability levels, if you
are not already on the likes of a 325
Progressive, if you're on something a
bit bigger, stick with the likes of the
320. Likewise, if you're a slightly
bigger bloke, or you're not quite as
confident on the water, go for the
bigger ones. The 300, though, is the one
that I'm going to be spending as much
time as I possibly can on. The cool
thing is you also feel the drive
forwards uh in the pump. The same way I
talked about it in the surge, you feel
that with the surf skinny as well. So it
only amplifies that element of the
surge, but that will also come into its
own with any foil. So if you're just
wanting to loosen up your existing
setup, this is a really really nice
option to do so. Um whereas still
maintaining a lot of speed and a lot of
glide, you then get a lot of turning
ability as well.
Fuselage wise, advanced plus ultra short
fuse is
that's it. That's the only one you
really need to look at. It's not
obviously, but that ticks too many boxes
to not be a strong contender for the the
main showboat of of fuselages. Um,
levelwise, that that just seems to be
the one that ticks too many boxes. Way
too many boxes. So, everything I do
personally is on an Ultrashort Advance
Plus. Open water, winging, prone
foiling, toe foiling, everything happens
on an ultrashort advance fuse. And
that's where I generally want you to
stick to or want to stick towards. If
you want something a little bit
twitchier, you could go for a longer
fuselage or not twitchier but quicker
turning, you could go for a shorter
fuselage. Uh if you want something a bit
more stable on on straight lines if
you're toe foiling big stuff or if
you're in the open water on a big spanny
foil, you could go towards something a
little bit longer like the short. But
otherwise, the ultra short advances the
goldilocks
fuselage.
Any questions? give us a shout.
Otherwise, we'll see you on the next
video. Apologies for the ramblings.